Documenting KUDO tasks (#116)
kudobuilder/www: content/docs/tasks.md

> # Tasks

Reviewer: I am kind of wondering if this should not go under 'concepts' if we ever clean that up. I just feel like we have too many stuff on the top level https://kudo.dev/docs/ (on my mac I even have to scroll to see all)

This is nothing against this PR I just wonder what is the ideal docs structure and I was trying to avoid putting more things in the root

Reviewer: or under developing operators? 🤔

Author: > I just feel like we have too many stuff on the top level

Tasks absolutely do not belong on the top-level. But I had to start somewhere 🤷‍♀ I think that all three: `Features`, `Developing Operators`, `Examples` and now `Tasks` belong under the same ☂️ Wdyt about:

```
└── Developing Operators
    ├── Introduction (former developing-operators.md)
    ├── Task (tasks.md)
    ├── Features (features.md)
    └── Examples (examples/README.md)
```

Reviewer: I am not sure about features, because e.g. webhook is more about managing operators then developing them (and I put it under features). Maybe we should have the docs separated by personas actually and features are too generic.

So I think I like what you're proposing, we should have developing operators with tasks and then running operators with webhook? 🤔 

Btw. I am fine with doing this restructure in another PR - up to you :)

Author: Ah, webhooks PR hasn't been merged yet but you put it into features? 🤔 But I like the separation in "developing" and "managing". Though, current `feature.md` content `Controlled Parameter Changes` is more about...developing?

Reviewer: yeah ... I don't know. Also where does cleanup plan go, that could be both... 🤔but probably also developing? but I think that pipes go definitely into developing...

Author: Ok, so I left `Features` at the top for now - not sure where it fits best. But the rest looks like the following:

```
Docs/
...
├── Developing Operators
│   ├── Concepts
│   ├── First Operator (former developing-operators.md)
│   └── Tasks
│   └── Examples
│       ├── Apache Flink
│       ├── Apache Kafka
│       └── Apache ZooKeeper
```
wdyt?

Reviewer: I am not sure about the examples as the content of those pages right now seems to me more like operating, that developing

With concepts I am undecided ... right now they more describe the CRD structure, I am not sure you need that when developing actually, maybe more when operating? I don't know, that page is still ... meh ... to me :) but we could start with putting it there

First Operator I would rename to `Getting started`

But overall much better structure than the current one 👍 :)

## Overview

> A task is the basic building block in the KUDO workflow. Plans, phases, and steps are control structures that execute tasks at the end. You've already come across an Apply-task when developing your [first-operator](first-operator.md#your-first-kudo-operator). KUDO (as of 0.9.0) offers three main task types: `Apply`, `Delete`, `Pipe` and one `Dummy` task which is helpful when debugging and testing your operator. All KUDO tasks are defined in the [operator.yaml](first-operator.md#operatoryaml-file) and must have three fields:

Reviewer 2: Saying three types and listing four seems a little odd, would try to rephrase this for more clarity

```suggestion
A task is the basic building block in the KUDO workflow. Plans, phases, and steps are control structures that execute tasks at the end. You've already come across an Apply-task when developing your [first-operator](first-operator.md#your-first-kudo-operator). KUDO (as of 0.9.0) offers three main task types: `Apply`, `Delete`, and `Pipe`. Additionally there is a `Dummy` task which is helpful when debugging and testing your operator. All KUDO tasks are defined in the [operator.yaml](first-operator.md#operatoryaml-file) and must have three fields:
```

```yaml
tasks:
  - name: # Task name defined by the user
    kind: # Task kind can be these four: Apply, Delete, Pipe and Dummy
    spec: # Task-specific specification
```

Let's take a look at an individual task type in detail.

## Apply-Task

> An apply-task applies (!) templates to the cluster. Pretty simple. Its `spec.resources` field defines a list of templates that will be applied to the cluster. Given a definition like the one from the [first-operator](developing-operators.md#your-first-kudo-operator):

Reviewer: could you explain apply that in k8s terms? I guess in our case it's something like create-or-update right?

```yaml
tasks:
  - name: app
    kind: Apply
    spec:
      resources:
        - deployment.yaml
```

> a task named `app` will launch a deployment defined in `templates/deployment.yaml`.

Reviewer: create a deployment resource? Launch feels like too much, it's actually kubernetes controllers that are "launching" something in my head based on the resources we apply :)

KUDO will apply all the listed resources and wait for all of them to become healthy. "Health" is dependent on the particular resource: a [deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/) must have a defined number of spec instances up and running, a [Job](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/jobs-run-to-completion/) must finish successfully and e.g. a [ConfigMap](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/configmap) will be simply created in the cluster.

> **Note:** current implementation will apply all resources in the given order so that e.g. a Pod can mount previously created ConfigMap. However, this is not part of the specification and might change in the future (all resources can be applied concurrently). If you need [happens-before-guarantee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Happened-before) between your resources, use e.g. multiple serial steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** The current implementation will apply all resources in the given order so that e.g. a Pod can mount previously created ConfigMap. However, this is not part of the specification and might change in the future (all resources can be applied concurrently). If you need [happens-before-guarantee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Happened-before) between your resources, use e.g. multiple serial steps.
```

## Delete-Task

A delete-task looks very similar to an apply-task, however, it will delete resources instead of creating them. Let's create a task that will uninstall the app we created above:

```yaml
tasks:
  - name: remove
    kind: Delete
    spec:
      resources:
        - deployment.yaml
```

> **Note:** deleting non-existing resources is always successful. As of KUDO 0.9.0, it will not wait for the resource to be actually removed e.g. k8s imposes a default graceful termination period of 30 seconds when terminating pods, however, a delete-task will be done before that.

Reviewer: maybe link this https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/garbage-collection/ and mention that we don't wait for finalizers? (so if there are finalizers, we finish that task when api server accepts our deletion request, not when resource is actually removed from the cluster)

> **Note:** deleting non-existing resources is always successful. As of version 0.9.0, KUDO will not wait for the resource to be actually removed and will finish the task when the API server accepts the deletion request. So in case of Pods, k8s imposes a default graceful termination period of 30 seconds, however, a delete-task will be done before that. KUDO 0.9.0 will not wait for [resource finalizers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/garbage-collection/) should they exist.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering why, is there a KEP to link to here?

Author: Why what? not waiting for finalizers? just not implemented yet. Also, not clear if that's semantic that operators need.

## Pipe-Task

Developing complicated operators often require generating files in one step and reusing them in a later one. A common example is generating custom certificates/dynamic configuration files in the bootstrap step and using them in the later deployment step of the service. This is were pipe-tasks can help: you can generate files in one task and save them either as a [Secret](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/secret) or a [ConfigMap](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/configmap) for use in subsequent steps. Let's see it in action. We will extend [first-operator](developing-operators.md#your-first-kudo-operator) to generate a custom `index.html` page and deploy the Nginx server with it. Let's define a new pipe-task called `genwww`:

```yaml
tasks:
  - name: genwww
    kind: Pipe
    spec:
      pod: pipe-pod.yaml
      pipe:
        - file: /tmp/index.html
          kind: ConfigMap
          key: indexHtml
```

> a pipe-task spec has two fields: a `pod` spec that will generate our `index.html` and a `pipe` spec that defines a list of files that will be persisted. Here we'll generate a `/tmp/index.html` file that we'll save as a `ConfigMap`. It can be referenced with the key `indexHtml` (more about that below). Pipe-task `spec.pod` field must reference a [core/v1 Pod](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.10/#pod-v1-core) template. However, there are limitations. Reasons for that are explained in the [corresponding KEP](https://github.com/kudobuilder/kudo/blob/master/keps/0017-pipe-tasks.md). In a nutshell:

Reviewer: Start with capital "A"?

Reviewer: "It can be referenced with the key" -> "It can be referenced within operator.yaml with the key" ? I was immediately thinking you're talking about kubernetes

> Pipe-task spec has two fields: a `pod` spec that will generate our `index.html` and a `pipe` spec that defines a list of files that will be persisted. Here we'll generate a `/tmp/index.html` file that we'll save as a `ConfigMap`. It can be referenced within template resources with the key `indexHtml` (more about that below). Pipe-task `spec.pod` field must reference a [core/v1 Pod](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.10/#pod-v1-core) template. However, there are limitations. Reasons for that are explained in the [corresponding KEP](https://github.com/kudobuilder/kudo/blob/master/keps/0017-pipe-tasks.md). In a nutshell:

Reviewer 2: Is the config map removed afterwards? As config maps keep everything in plain text, is this currently really a good mechanism for secrets like custom certificates?

Author: For certificates use pipe `kind: Secret`

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
spec:
  volumes:
  - name: shared-data
    emptyDir: {}
  initContainers:
    - name: init
      image: busybox
      command: [ "/bin/sh", "-c" ]
      args:
        - wget -O /tmp/index.html 'http://cowsay.morecode.org/say?message=Good+things+come+when+you+least+expect+them&format=html'
      volumeMounts:
        - name: shared-data
          mountPath: /tmp
```

Here we use an online [cowsay-generator](http://cowsay.morecode.org) API to generate and download an `index.html` file and save in the mounted volume under `/tmp/index.html` path.  

Given the above pipe-pod and `genwww` task specification, KUDO will run the pipe-pod, wait for the successful generation of the `index.html`, copy it out and save it as a ConfigMap. Now, this file is ready to be used in our Nginx deployment spec. Let's extend the `templates/deployment.yaml` to mount the generated file:

```yaml
...
spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: nginx:1.7.9
      ports:
        - containerPort: 80
      volumeMounts:
        - name: www
          mountPath: /usr/share/nginx/html/
  volumes:
    - name: www
      configMap:
        name: {{ .Pipes.indexHtml }}
```

> We successfully created a [mount volume from the ConfigMap](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-pod-configmap/#populate-a-volume-with-data-stored-in-a-configmap). Note the parametrized ` {{ .Pipes.indexHtml } }` configMap name. `.Pipes` keyword allows us to address pipe-artifacts and `indexHtml` is the key we defined in the pipe-task above.

Reviewer: `{{ .Pipes.indexHtml } }` -> `{{ .Pipes.indexHtml }}`

Author: Nope 😂 vuepress breaks because of `}}` and escaping them doesn't help. 

P.S. I was wondering if anybody notices and you won! 🎉

          - name: genfiles
            tasks:
              - genwww
          - name: app
            tasks:
              - app
```

**Note** that the `main` phase has a `serial` strategy. We need to wait for the `genfiles` step to finish successfully before pipe-artifact can be used in a subsequent step.

Once our Nginx server is up and running we should be able to read a pearl of cow wisdom:

```text
  ______________________________________
/ Good things come when you least expect \
\ them                                   /
  --------------------------------------
         \   ^__^
          \  (oo)\_______
             (__)\       )\/\
                 ||----w |
                 ||     ||
```  

**Note:**

- File generating Pod has to be side-effect free (meaning side-effects that are observable outside of the container like a 3rd party API call) as the container might be executed multiple times on failure. A `restartPolicy: OnFailure` is used for the pipe-pod
- Only files <1Mb are applicable to be stored as ConfigMap or Secret. A pipe-task will fail should it try to copy files >1Mb
- As of KUDO 0.9.0 pipe-artifacts can only be used within the same plan they were generated

> - You can pipeline artifacts by creating them in one pipe-task and mounting in a subsequent one

Reviewer: hmm I am not sure what this means, can you elaborate? Oh you mean that you can have multiple pipe tasks each reading input from the previous one?

Author: > Oh you mean that you can have multiple pipe tasks each reading input from the previous one?

exactly. would you phrase it differently?
